Build: Disable Builder SA (#1558)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/builds/disable-builder-sa.md

account does not need permission to create pods with elevated pod security
permissions, as this has been delegated to the build controller's service
account.

[1] https://issues.redhat.com/browse/WRKLDS-695

### User Stories

- As an enterprise platform engineer, I want a mechanism to disable the builder
  service account - even if the “Build” capability is enabled on the cluster -
  so that I can provide my own RBAC for builds in the “golden path” namespace
  template for dev teams.
- As an information security officer, I want to disable the builder service
  account as part of our process to limit access to the OCP Build system on
  production/application clusters so that only service accounts related to
  applications are deployed, and they have the minimum permissions necessary.
- As a software architect/platform engineer, I want to change the default
  service account used for builds so I can customize its permissions.
- As a product manager, I want to know how many OpenShift clusters are
  disabling the builder service account so that I can understand the impact of
  this feature.

### Goals

- On existing clusters that have the `Build` capability enabled, cluster admins

>   can disable the creation of the `builder` service account.

Reviewer: is it possible to create custom builder service account which will allow buildconfig to work against custom registry?

Author: This should be feasible - the `BuildConfig` and `Build` APIs both let developers [set a service account](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/master/build/v1/types.go#L58-L61). IIRC the only requirement is that the service account is bound to the appropriate image-pull/image-push system roles if the build pushes to the internal registry.

We don't have [documentation](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.14/cicd/builds/advanced-build-operations.html) on this yet - I will add it as a feature requirement, along with the corresponding CI validation.

> - On existing clusters that the `builder` and service accounts are disabled,

Reviewer: if customer have 50k namespaces, what will enabling this capability do on cluster startup?

Reviewer 2: The reasonable solution in this case would be to use mechanism similar to what we do in job controller, which is batching the creations, see https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/109491f3cbaefcaf95e9e94ea0c216bfc38d6570/pkg/controller/job/job_controller.go#L1551-L1604.

Author: Did the math on this - IMO this would have an upper bound 40 MiB storage cost per 10k namespaces. I'm being real generous/conservative here assuming 1 KiB per object. So even at 50k, we're not even hitting 3% of etcd's limit, and OpenShift would be firing alerts well before then.

  cluster admins can enable creation of these service accounts in every
  namespace.

> - When the `builder` service account is disabled, existing `builder` service

Reviewer: if they delete them, manually, they won't be recreated correct? or if they modify their secrets, etc.

- When the `builder` service account is disabled, manual deletion of existing
  `builder` service accounts should not lead to recreation of these service
  accounts.

### Non-Goals

- Cleaning up and deleting existing builder service accounts in namespaces
  after the SA generation controller is disabled.
- Enable/disable the `deployer` service account. This will require a different
  implementation/API.
- Disable the `BuildConfig` API and controllers on clusters that have the `Build`
  capability enabled at install time, or turn on the Build capability after
  installation.
- Refactoring “system:*” bootstrap roles and rolebindings related to BuildConfigs.
- Add Service Accounts as a `buildDefault`/`buildOverride` feature.
- Fine tune the RBAC of the generated `builder` service account.

## Proposal

The general idea is to expose a new cluster-level configuration that controls
if the `builder` service account is created.

### Workflow Description

1. The cluster is created or upgaded with the `Build` capability enabled.
2. On install or upgrade with the `Build` capability enabled, the `Build`
   cluster configuration CRD will be installed. The CRD will have a new field

>    to declare that the `builder` service account should be generated:

Author: Will add necessary context - use case is an enterprise with hundreds of OCP clusters, upgrading from 4.12 (and earlier) to 4.14. "Lift and shift" to new clusters without the `Build` capability may not be feasible in that scenario/scale.

   ```yaml
   apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
   kind: Build
   spec:
     buildDefaults:
       ...
     buildOverrides:
       ...
     builderServiceAccount: Generate   
   ```

3. The cluster administrator edits the cluster build system configuration to
   disable the generation of the builder serice account.

   ```yaml
   apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
   kind: Build
   spec:
     ...

>      builderServiceAccount: Disable

Reviewer: isn't it easier to just call this field `builderServiceAccountDisabled: true` and get rid of the "Generate" ? in that case you don't have to default, etc.

Reviewer 2: The general guideline is against boolean fields, especially when we envision additional behaviors, just like Adam explained above.

`Generate` by ocm-o if detected. Follow up features may add additional
supported values (ex: `Remove`).

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraint

Many aspects of of the Build system and its user experience assume the
`builder` service account is created in every namespace. Disabling the auto
generation of this account, its RBAC, and its push secret may cause builds to
fail. To address this, builds should "fail fast" if the service account
specified for the build does not exist at pod creation time.

For platform teams that want to "bring their own builder" service account, OCP
should provide detailed documentation describing the RBAC that is generated for
the `builder` service account.

#### Hypershift [optional]

No specific considerations are needed for Hypershift at present, as the `Build`
cluster configuration resources are not exposed through hosted control plane
APIs. If these configurations are exposed in the future, Hypershift will need
to ensure appropriate behavior of openshift-controller-manager for each "guest
cluster." Refactoring decisions - such as running the build-related controllers
in their own `Deployment` - may be considered at such time.

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 2: Add here a risk which Michal described in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1558/files#r1488230335

set will the builder SA cease to be generated.

**Downgrade**

On downgrade, ocm-o will need to be rolled back to the version that does not
read the `builderServiceAccount` field. This version will continue to generate
the builder service account in all namespaces.

### Version Skew Strategy

Skew can happen if the `Build` CRD for `config.openshift.io` does not align
with ocm-o:

- CRD updated, but not ocm-o: builder service account should continue to be
  created.
- CRD not updated, but ocm-o is: builder service account should continue to be
  created. We may see the operator report errors trying update a the `Build`
  CRD instance, in which event the operator should re-queue and try again.

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

This feature does not introduce new CRDs or admission webhooks. The default
value for `builderServiceAccount` is created through Kubernetes CRD features.

This feature could impact user experience if cluster admins/platform engineers
do not configure a `builder` service account on behalf of developers. This
would result in an increase in faild builds on the cluster. We currently do not

> have SLIs for builds due to the their highly variable execution.

Author: Yes - `openshift_build_status_phase_total`, with labels for `error|failed|complete|canceled`

> have SLIs for builds due to the their highly variable execution.

Reviewer 2: Call it out here, in that case, explaining in short how to read it.

### Workflow Description

flowchart TD
    A[Install] -->|Enable `Build` Capability| B(Build cluster config)
    B --> C{spec.builderServiceAccunt}
    C --> D[Empty]
    D --> H[Set to `Generate`] 
    H --> |ocm-o| C
    C --> E[Other]
    E --> H
    C --> F[Generate]
    C --> G[Disable]
    F --> |ocm-o| I[Turn on `builder` controllers]
    G --> |ocm-o| J[Turn off `builder` controllers]

1. The cluster is created or upgaded with the `Build` capability enabled.
2. On install or upgrade with the `Build` capability enabled, the `Build`
   cluster configuration CRD will be installed. The CRD will have a new field
   to declare that the `builder` service account should be generated:

   ```yaml
   apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
   kind: Build
   spec:
     buildDefaults:
       ...
     buildOverrides:
       ...
     builderServiceAccount: Generate   
   ```

3. cluster-openshift-controller-manager-operator (ocm-o) ensures that this
   field is populated with a valid value. If none is set, or it is set to an
   invalid value, the operator sets this to `Generate`.
4. The cluster administrator edits the cluster build system configuration to

>    disable the generation of the builder serice account.

Author: ```suggestion
   disable the generation of the builder service account.
```

For platform teams that want to "bring their own builder" service account, OCP
should provide detailed documentation describing the RBAC that is generated for
the `builder` service account.

### Risks and Mitigations

* Risk that builds fail if the service account for the build pod does not
  exist. This can be mitigated by ensuring builds fail fast in this scenario,
  with an actionable error message.
* Risk that "bring your own" service account builds fail, especially pushing to
  the internal registry. We may not be able to easily mitigate this, as the UX
  should be no different for failing to push to an external registry like
  quay.io.
* Risk that this feature is enabled on clusters with a high magnitude of
  namespaces (10k), resulting in a large number of objects being created at
  once. This is mitigated by the rate limiters baked into the
  `openshift-controller-manager` controllers and the QPS limits for the
  controller clients. The current controller defaults (10 QPS, 100 burst) imply
  an upper bound of ~40 objects created per second, each one of fairly small
  size (under 1 KiB). At 10k namespaces, this represents at most 40 MiB of

>   storage - small in comparison to the etcd limit of 8GiB.

Author: ```suggestion
  storage - small in comparison to the etcd limit of 8 GiB (less than 1%).
```
